# Empirical Velocity Distribution of Dark Matter
## Work published as arXiv:1708.XXXXX, by Jonah-Herzog-Arbeitman, Mariangela Lisanti, and Lina Necib

### Abstract:
The local velocity distribution of dark matter plays an integral role in interpreting the results from experimental searches.  We previously showed that metal-poor halo stars serve as excellent tracers of the virialized dark matter velocity distribution using a high-resolution hydrodynamic  simulation of a Milky Way--like halo.  In this paper, we take advantage of the first _Gaia_ data release, coupled with spectroscopic measurements from the RAdial Velocity Experiment (RAVE), to study the kinematics of stars belonging to the metal-poor halo within an average distance of ~ 5 kpc of the Sun.  We study stars with iron abundances [Fe/H] < -1.5 and -1.8 that are located more than 1.5 kpc from the Galactic plane.  Using a Gaussian mixture model analysis, we identify the stars that belong to the halo population, as well as some kinematic outliers.  We find that both metallicity samples have similar velocity distributions for the halo component, within uncertainties.  Assuming that the stellar velocities adequately trace the virialized dark matter, we study the implications for direct detection experiments.  The Standard Halo Model, which is typically assumed for dark matter, is discrepant with the empirical distribution by ~ 6 sigma and predicts fewer high-speed particles.  As a result, the Standard Halo Model overpredicts the nuclear scattering rate for dark matter masses below ~ 10 GeV.  Upcoming data releases from _Gaia_ will refine these predictions of the dark matter distribution, and further study of the kinematic outliers that we identify will determine whether they are correlated with dark matter substructure.  


### Datasets:

We find two velocity distributions of these metal poor stars, one for each of the [Fe/H] cuts. The files are in this repository and can be obtained by forking/downloading this repository.
